Mr. Whitfield, tell us something about your early
life, including the names of your parents, the
dates and places of their births and death, the
place and date of your birth, and the schools you
attended before you entered Texas A&M. Well, my
father was James Whitfield, and he was born in
Georgia. I can't tell you exactly when. Now,
where? My mother was Eliza Whitfield Brown. She
was Eliza Brown, born in Rush County, Texas. I
can't tell you that exactly. I might figure it
back. I could figure it. Can we put that at the end of
the tape? Let me do a little figuring. I don't want
to slow the thing up. Or if you can tell us when they
died and how old they were. Well, my father died in
1922.
He was 82 years old. My mother died in 1932.
She was 77 years old. She was a good bit younger than
he was. I was born at Henderson, Texas, January the
12th, 1892.
And you want me to go from there? Right. All right.
So when I was just 12, 8 or 9 years old, my parents
moved to Tom Green County, a ranch north of San
Angelo, and I grew up on that ranch going to school
in a horse and buggy And later they moved into town
so we could have the benefit of these. What was the
ranch? Did the ranch have a name? No, just James
Whitfield Ranch. James Whitfield. Your father
owned the ranch. Okay. Did you have any
responsibilities on the ranch as you were growing
up? Oh, just to the normal youngsters growing up. I
rode a horse along with everybody else. For how
many years then did you ride the horse and buggy
back and forth to school every day? I'd say until
about four years. Then you moved into San Angelo.
Moved into San Angelo, yes. Was your move from
Henderson, was it? From Henderson to San Angelo.
To the ranch in San Angelo. Was that by train? By
train. My father used a boxcar to transfer the as
they did in those days, some livestock. I don't
know what it was. I just don't remember seeing any.
It was a milk cow, probably. There wasn't any. What
kind of business had he been engaged in in
Henderson before he moved to the ranch? He had
formerly been, he had had some sheep business.
He'd been tax collector in Rusk County at one time.
Must have been somewhat of a gamble to give up a
steady job, so to speak, as a tax collector or
county official to take on a ranch. Well,
primarily he was a rancher, a farmer. He wanted to
get back into that business. Was San Angelo, or
that area, I gather, was a pretty wide-open area?
bleak place, was it? Well, no. San Angelo was a
fairly good town at that time. It was small, of
course. But it was wide open, as you say. They had
saloons and honky-tonk and all that.
Then you graduated from San Angelo High School?
No, I took my last two years of high school at
Trinity University at Waxahachie.
Why did you choose to do that? Well, my parents
chose it for me. Was that a larger and better school
than San Angelo? Well, it was Trenton University.
It's at San Antonio now, you know. And they had what
they called the Academy at that time. It was
sub-freshmen.
Well, it would take two years. They would take you
in your junior and senior year of high school. So
that's where I got my high school and didn't get a
diploma. I just finished the work. Finished the
work. What factors were involved in your choice of
Texas A&M? Oh, I don't know. I guess growing up on a
ranch, I was interested in livestock. So
you had the opportunity. And I had had an uncle
prior to My mother's brothers attended A&M, but he
didn't graduate. He attended for a year. So you
knew of the agricultural instruction that was
available there, and you were going for that.
You said you didn't receive a diploma, so to speak,
from Trinity,
so you didn't have a diploma when you entered Texas
A&M. What kind of procedure did you go through to
Oh, I don't know if Charles Friely was there then or
not, but I took some grades from Trinity with me,
not a transcript, but the courses I had taken, they
admitted me with that. You didn't, as the students
do today, apply months in advance? Oh, no. No, I
just showed up down there. You just showed up in
time for registration. Yeah. What was your first
reaction? to the school and to the community when
you arrived? Well, that's rather interesting.
Charlie Moran was a fish along with me, and they
were working out for football. And I was Don Lee's
freshman.
He was a San Angelo boy. He was a junior that year.
And he told me that he was in company C, and he told me
to get into company C. Well, I went through the mill
and got Captain Moses, who was a commandant at that
time. He asked me if I had a preface to company, and I
said, yes, sir, C. And I guess I was scared of
something, but he put down G. So I went to G, and Don
Lee, at that time, we were in Goodman Hall, and we
had to go around the south end of Foster Hall. And
there was a bunch of football players, and Don Lee
introduced me to them as his fish. I don't know what
he told them, but he invited them to have at it, and
they did.
You say Charlie Moran was a fish. Freshman. He was a
freshman coach. He was a freshman. That was his
first, 1909 was his first. First year as coach. So
right after you registered then, the football
players kind of worked you over. Yes, that's
right. but
it was kind of a warm reception. Really a warm
reception. I was ready to go home.
After that, were you still Mr. Lee's fish, even
though you were in different companies? No, I got
to be a fish. The old boy that looked after me was
named Lake Robertson. He was from Bollinger.
which is just this side of San Angelo. He took me
under his wing and guided me, but Don looked after
me once in a while. He'd come by to see how I was
getting along. So primarily if you were
somebody's fish, it was an upperclassman in your
company. Yes, that's right. That sort of activity
didn't cross company lines, is the rule.
No. Were you assigned to Goodwin Hall? Yes. Then
the first year you were there. What other
dormitories did you live in? Mitchell. The first
year that Mitchell was occupied, they moved G
Company into Mitchell. And then did you stay in
Mitchell the rest of the time? Just the one year,
yes, my senior year. Your senior year in Mitchell.
What was life like in those dormitories? Well...
There was lots of fun. You and Aggie? No. Well, you
haven't had the experience. I don't know whether
they did it in your age time or not, but we had plenty
of hazing going on. It wasn't wild. They'd strap
you. Usually
they'd have somebody would... take you and tell
you to report after dinner, after supper, every
night. You'd go in and if you were a good fish they'd
just slap you once or twice and let you go, but if you
were an honorary fish they'd let you have it. And we
had some peanut racers up and down the hall with our
noses, you know, somebody standing by on his
drivers, things of that sort. A couple of fish
racing against each other?
Yes. But it was good life. It was lots of fun. Lots of
bull sessions? Oh, yeah.
Of course, at that time, after we got through with
supper, They marched us to our meals, but after we
were through eating, we all just straggled on. And
we had to call the quarters at that time. You had to
be in your room, and
then they blew an assembly, I guess. I don't
remember what the people's call was.
I believe it was at 7 o'clock or 7.30. You had to be in
your room. And we had all student government at
that time. And there were no profs or no sergeants
or anything in the dorms. It was all the captain of
the company was responsible for the behavior of
the fellows in his company. And we had inspection
right after call to quarters to see that you were in
your room. You stayed in there until what we called
Tattoo, which was 1015, and then at 1030 we had
taps, and you had to have your lights out. I guess
Kerber told you all that, didn't he? Well, he was
pretty much the same when he was there.
Did you take it a sentry walking the hallways
during the flight hour? Yeah. And we all stood
guard, all the privates. walked post in the
different dormitories, and we had an officer of
the day from the corps, the sergeant of the guard,
and the corporal of the guard. Now was this all day?
No, just at night. Just during the quiet hours? Of
course, the officer of the day and the sergeant of
the guard were all day long, but the sentries were
just at night, to walk post during the study hour.
When somebody was assigned as officer of the day,
was he in the quarters all day then? Or did he have to
leave when he went to class? He was in the guard room
all day or whatever it was. I think it was a guard
room. But he had to make inspections of the rooms to
see that the beds were made and that they were
clean. Well, if he was officer of the day, then was
he excused from classes for that day? Oh, yes. Yes.
This was done on a rotating basis, I would gather.
Yes. So you would be officer of the day only a couple
of times, I suppose, in a turn. Probably. I just
don't recall how often.
Okay.
What kind of activity did you have right after you
got up? I mean, you were awakened by the bugle?
Bugle. We did everything to the bugle. We had
revelry. We got out and did calisthenics. For
about how long? Oh, 10 minutes, I'd say. And then
you do what? Dress, shave, dress. Went over and
assembled for breakfast. And they marched us to
breakfast. And as I say, after we finished eating,
we just wandered back to quarters. and then
getting ready to go to class. Yes. And sometime
during the day, this man that was officer of the day
would inspect your quarters to make sure that they
were made properly. And everything was cleaned
up. The floor was clean. The GI bucket was...
We had that in
Goodwin Hall. In Mitchell, we had a little
different proposition. A little better. You had a
regular bathroom? Yeah, we had showers. We had to
go to Natler, Goodman Hall, to get our baths. Well,
Goodman Hall was then a fairly new dormitory,
wasn't it? It didn't have any showers. That's
right. No, we went to Natler until, well, fall of
1912 when we went to Mitchell Hall. I don't know
what they did in Goodman Hall after that. Because
it seemed to me that the old natatorium that they
called it was the one with the steam plant. It
wasn't a natatorium, it was just showers. They
called it the natatorium. But
it seemed to me that it was closed right about fall
of 1912. Did they require you to take a shower
regularly, or did you just, was that? No, it was
voluntary. It was voluntary. Yeah, because you
were inspected regularly, so you had to keep
clean.
I ask that partly because I recently read some
letters written by a fellow who was there in the
1880s, and he indicated that he bathed regularly,
but one of the other boys had been taken to the
doctor because he was quite ill, and the doctor
asked him about how often he bathed, and the boy
said he had bathed twice since he'd been there,
about two and a half months, and both of those were
in the first week. Yeah.
I mean, he was smelling the high heaven with it. I
would imagine he was, yeah.
About how much time did you spend drilling? On a
daily basis, or did you drill daily? No, we drilled
every Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays. For an
hour, I believe. I believe that's right. Did you
have classes on Saturday as well as the other day?
Saturday morning. Saturday afternoon was fairly
free then? Free,
yeah. Okay. What was the food like in the mess hall?
Well, I enjoyed it. It was good. I'll never forget
the
coconut pie. I was a fish, and I remarked how much I
liked coconut pie, and there were two pies on the
table, and I ate them both. That must have been
something for a fish to get two whole pies. Well,
they made me eat them. The sophomores are sort of
that. Did they not like them? Oh, no, they just
wanted me to have all the pie I wanted. Normally
it's the other way around, isn't it? The
upperclassmen get the cushion. That's right.
They get the cushion. I
just made the remark, boy, there's some coconut
pie, and I sure do like it. Fish, you really like
coconut pie. Yeah, well, just eat both of these
pies.
At a normal table, I realized that the company ate
together. Now, obviously, the whole company
couldn't get it at one table. About how many people
would be at the table? No. We had two
sophomores at each table. They sat at the end, the
corporals. And as I recall, we had about 14 at the
table. And the company would be, what, about 100?
That or a little less. Most of the time they were in
the 80s too. So anywhere from six to seven tables
would be company.
What privileges did the upperclassmen enjoy that
the freshmen didn't have?
A freshman could do most anything that he could get
by with, except,
you mean so far as the school is concerned now?
Yeah. Freshman didn't have many privileges in the
dorm, because the upperclassmen saw that he was
kept in line. That was part of his training. But a
freshman couldn't go to town, couldn't go to
Bryan, once every month or something like that.
That would be only on a Saturday afternoon. Yeah,
on a Saturday afternoon. Or maybe Sunday, I don't
know. I'd have to go to Brian on Sunday. I seldom
went on Saturdays. Was the Tunerville trolley
working or in operation? It was a motor-driven bus
my senior year. What was it? It was none in
existence before that at all? How would you get to
Bryan before that? Either walk or ride a freight
train. Ride a freight train. Didn't the passenger
train stop in? No, it wasn't until the proper time.
Yeah, they stopped at College Station, the INGN
and H&TC, too. They both came through at that time.
I don't know if they still do or not, do they? Well,
they still have the tracks there. They come
through as freight trains, I believe. But those
trains, it was not convenient to take those. No,
the hours weren't convenient to take into Bryan.
But you could hop, could hop a freight. Could hop a
freight. Or walk. Or walk. It's about a, what,
five-mile hike? About a five-mile hike. Into what
would have been downtown Bryan. Yeah. What, for
what purposes did the students go to Bryan? Oh,
just to go to town, more or less, I think. Wade Cox
had a pool hall that got quite a play, all right. I
don't know if you've ever heard of Wade Cox's pool
hall. No, never heard of Wade Cox's pool hall. He
had a pool hall that got a lot of play, and the Harry
Jenkins Bar got a little play, too. I don't know if
you've heard of his place. No. Maybe I'm talking
too much. No, you're not talking too much. I don't
know, in those days the cadets could go in and get a
nigger to get them some beer or something.
I should say a black or colored person,
rather. But they went to Brown to, they probably,
some fellows had girls who they knew that they
wanted to call on, particularly upperclassmen.
But the freshmen, they didn't have anybody. They
didn't have any cause to go to Bryan, really,
truly. As far as anything that they needed for
school, I presume that was available on campus,
probably. Oh, yes. So we wouldn't have to go to
Bryan to buy things. What was that bohemian that
made the uniforms? I had the uniforms. Charlie...
Mitchie? Mitchie, yeah. He made the uniforms and
had everything that you needed in the way of
clothing. Where was his shop? I don't recall. It
seemed to me it was in the,
to the left. That's the present Nassau, the old
Spieser Hall, the present Spieser Hall. It was the
left and back of it a little, as I recall. Of course,
not too far from Gathright Hall. Let's see, the Y
was not built until after you, was not completed
until after you graduated, was it? That's right.
We had just a basement, as I think. So there was a
basement portion of it completed while you were
there. What was available down there? Oh, not much
of anything. Not much of anything, no. Did you have
any kind of place where students could gather
socially? Oh, we had an old barn for a gym.
I don't think they even had a name for it, as I
recall. Just a gym? Just a gym. Okay. Was that where
the basketball team played? Did intramural
basketball play there, too? There wasn't any
intramural basketball. There was intramural
baseball and football. Basketball didn't come in
until later, did it? No. I was managing the first
basketball team A&M ever had. That is, of the
college basketball team? Yeah. I believe, let's
see, you were there when both the Old Main and the
original mess hall burning, weren't you? I was a
fireman. You fought the fire. Bucket Brigade. I
imagine that was quite something, wasn't it? Oh,
it was. The mess hall, as I recall, burned just
before Christmas, and they had us go home a little
early. We came back, and they had an old
contonement built in the fetus there. A what? A
contonement, kind of a ramshackle. Army-type
structure, you know, for emergencies. So that's
where you ate until—? Until Spieser was finished.
Spieser was finished. It was finished
for—gosh, it was—when
did it burn? I've forgotten. Was it in the spring of
12? I believe so, yeah. Old Main burned in 11, I
believe, in Mesa. Mesa burned before Main did.
Mesa burned first, and then Main. Yeah. That's not
much difference, I don't suppose. We have a number
of pictures of the old Main building during the
fire, and some of the walls there are still left.
How did they tear down the walls? Or do you recall? I
don't recall. I don't believe they'd torn them
down one night. Yes, they bound to have torn them
down before I graduated. Because I believe they
started the new building on the same location and
completed it by 14. Had they? Yeah. So the new one
was probably being constructed your final year
there.
Did the cadet officers enjoy any particular
privileges that were not available to the other
cadets? No. You mentioned, say, in the mess hall
that you had a corporal at either end of the table.
Where did the other company officers eat? They
were scattered around in there and all through the
tables. Did they not eat with the company? Oh, yes.
Yes. What about the regimental officers? Did they
eat? They had a staff table. Staff table. Yeah.
They were privileged. They got steaks and things
like that. So the regimental officers had better
food than you did. Yes, they did, yes. Was the same
true for the athletes? Oh, yeah. The same table was
a good place to eat. Well, when you were manager of
the basketball team, did you get to eat with the
athletes? You bet, you bet. That was a good
incentive for being in. Oh, yeah. That's your
watch. Uh-huh. Now, on this training table, did
the athletes eat there the whole year or just while
they were participating? Just during their
season.
Did the athletes have any other privileges other
than the training table? No. They had to, when they
weren't practicing, would have to do their
regular drills? No, they didn't. Well, yeah, I'll
take it back now. The football team and the
baseball team, as I recall, didn't drill, but the
basketball team did, because they—wait a minute,
I'm not right about that.
I was captain of the Chief Company, and I was the
manager of the basketball team, so I'm bound to
have drilled. I had to be with my company. So all
companies drilled at the same time? Yeah. See, we
just had three battalions, twelve companies. The
parade ground took care of it pretty well. Did you
have any favorite instructors? Well, yeah, I
guess so. I guess you'd call Dr. Mark Francis one of
my favorites. What did you particularly like
about him? John Burns. What did you particularly
like about Dr. Francis? Well, he was
a good instructor, good teacher, and a rare
character, if there ever was one. Is it all right if
I tell you a little incident? Sure, let me make sure
I have enough tape here on this side. Yeah, I
believe so. Well, we had a fellow named Frank
Lockridge in our company, and we had The vet
science was taught was kind of an amphitheater.
Frank would always sit over there in the open
window and chew tobacco. Doc Francis got up one day
and picked up a GI bucket and took it up there and put
it down. He said, hey, Rube's spitting that. So he
was Rube Lockridge from then on.
Dr. Francis was quite a character. He was a
wonderful man, and then John Burns, he was a
prophet of the age. He was a good one.
Bobby Smith, math prof. Carby Cameron tried to
teach me some French, and it didn't take too well.
I know what you mean. I had some French in the
graduate school. Is that right? Well, Carby would
try to get me to say the feminine of one, you know,
U-N-E. I'd say, eun, and he'd say, no, it's not
that, it's eun. I couldn't get to suit him at all.
Well, the kind of French I took was not really so
much in speaking but in translating. We were
supposed to learn a few words, though, and they
were just beyond me. Between my English and my
German, I couldn't make those French words sound
right.